[Music]
Next weekend is one of the great events
of state in Great Britain. Trooping the
color, otherwise known as the sovereigns
birthday parade, when the monarch's
household troops pay their respects by
marking the king's official birthday
with a large military parade in central
London. Each year, one of the five
regiments of footguards troops its
color. The color being a special flag
given to it by the sovereign and upon
which are proudly emlazed its battle
honors. Here is last year's parade with
the color of the second battalion Irish
guards being trooped.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
To the uninitiated, the royal guards all
look the same, dressed in scarlet tunics
and tall black bare skin helmets. But
each regiment has its own particular
histories and distinctions. For example,
requiring uniforms, the pattern of
buttons on the tunic, the embroidered
regimental collar flashes, and a colored
helmet plume.
The regiments are the Grenadier,
Coldstream, Scots, Irish, and Welsh
Guards. And they rotate between public
duties and active operations and
overseas deployments. All of them being
regular soldiers. However, alongside the
household cavalry mounted regiment,
found of a squadron each of the
lifeguards and the Blues and Royals,
they formed the Household Division,
charged primarily with guarding the
monarch's official residences in London
and at Windsor Castle and conducting
ceremonial parades and events of state,
one of the most important of which is
trooping the color.
The British monarch is unusual in having
two birthdays, their real birthday and
an official one. the latter always in
June to try and ensure good weather for
military parades.
In 1981, it was the turn of the first
battalion Welsh Guards, the Junior
Guards Regiment formed in 1915 to parade
their color. The parade occurred on
Saturday the 13th of June. Riding in the
parade, as she had done for decades, and
taking the salute was Queen Elizabeth
II, royal colonel of the Welsh Guards.
She rode her faithful horse Burmese, a
19-year-old presented to her by the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police in 1969.
The Queen always rode Burmese for
trooping the color between 1969 and
1986.
She was dressed in a unique female
version of a colonel's uniform for the
Welsh Guards with her rank on the
epilelettes.
Recently, as a guest of the first
battalion Irish guards, I visited the
guards museum at Wellington barracks
beside Buckingham Palace. They have one
of the tunics worn by the queen for
trooping the color on display. This
example is for the Grenadier Guards, for
the Welsh Guard's uniform she wore in
1981 is very similar. Across her body
was the sash of the Order of the Garter,
with the Garter star pinned to her
tunic, and above that her medals, two of
which she had earned as an officer in
the auxiliary territorial service during
World War II.
The Queen rode side saddle a top her
horse and escorted by other officers and
men of the Household Division. She
departed from Buckingham Palace, riding
down the Mau to Horse Guards Parade,
where the trooping of the Welsh Guard's
color would occur in timehonored
fashion.
The Queen firmly believed that it was
very important to be seen by her
subjects, and in her military finery at
top the large black horse, she was
unmistakable to the thousands of people
that lined the parade route. Everyone
was happy and excited at the queen's
approach. All perhaps one man lurking
behind one of the barriers lining the
route. This man had evil intent in his
heart and the desire to do harm to her
majesty. That man's name, ironically,
given the military nature of the parade,
was Marcus Sergeant.
The queen's insistence on being visible,
unfortunately, also made her the perfect
target.
Sergeant had been born in 1963 or 64 in
Dova, Kent, and in 1981 was age 17. He
had been a member of cadet organizations
in his youth and was very interested in
firearms.
Firstly, as a boy scout in 1978, he had
then joined the air training corps, the
cadet part of the Royal Air Force,
earning a marksman's badge for shooting
excellence. He left school in 1980 with
seven O levels and joined the Royal
Marines. However, he left the core after
only 3 months, claiming to have been
bullied by training staff.
Sergeant next attempted to join the
army, but left after only 2 days.
Still intent on a career in the uniform
services, he next applied to join the
police, but was likewise rejected. The
same happening when he tried to join the
fire brigade.
Living in Folkston, Sergeant worked at a
zoo and then at an art center before
moving to Hawkhing, working in a youth
center. In October 1980, Sergeant joined
the anti-royalist movement and was
unemployed living with his mother while
his father worked abroad.
His father's Webly455
revolver was at the house and Sergeant
tried to obtain ammunition for it. He
needed a firearms license and so he
joined a local gun club in Kent and
practiced his shooting.
Then he paid Â£66.90
to buy through a mail order catalog two
blankfiring replica cult python
revolvers. These types of weapons being
unregulated in the 1980s.
His behavior also became increasingly
erratic. He sent photographs of himself
holding guns to magazines, including one
of them holding his father's very real
revolver.
He then posted a letter to Buckingham
Palace addressed directly to the queen.
It read, quote, "Your majesty, don't go
to the trooping the color ceremony
because there is an assassin set up to
kill you waiting just outside the
palace." End quote. This letter only
arrived at the palace 3 days after the
shooting.
Sergeant was later described as a shy
loner haunted by failure. Now the shy
loner was set to enact a frightening
attack on one of the world's most famous
people for reasons that remain unclear.
Sergeant joined the crowds lining the
mau early on the 13th of June 1981.
Around 6t tall, he was dressed in a
check shirt and sported a Charles and
Diana pin badge. Witnesses recalled that
he spoke to no one in the hours of
waiting. Sergeant took position at the
corner of the Mau and Horse Guards Road
where the parade would turn right into
Horsegard's parade.
The MAL was lined with members of the
Footguards regiments and police officers
and the nearest guardsman to Sergeant
was Lance Corporal Alec Galloway of the
Scots Guards.
As the queen turned the corner, Sergeant
was only a few yards away. And as this
photo shows, taken by a tourist who was
standing behind Sergeant, he raised his
pistol, holding it with both hands in a
trained shooter's stance and then opened
fire.
Field Marshall, his Royal Highness,
Prince Phillip, Edinburgh, Colonel of
the Grenadier Guards.
Lance Corporal Galloway turned and
grabbed Sergeant by the hair as members
of the public wrestled with the assassin
and police quickly piled in.
Sergeant was disarmed and dragged over
the barrier into the street and
arrested.
The six blank shots startled the queen
and her horse
of the grenadier.
But being the
consumate horsewoman, she soon regained
control of her mount and continued with
the parade.
Even though at the time no one knew if
the shots had been real, the queen,
though shaken up, never considered for a
moment leaving the parade. She continued
with her duty, riding resolutely on,
recovering her composure.
Looking again at this photograph, it is
very clear that if Sergeant had been
able to obtain ammunition for his
father's Webly 455 pistol, the Queen
would have been in grave danger of being
badly wounded or even killed by the
fuselade of shots at such close range.
As Sergeant was being subdued, he
shouted, "I wanted to be famous. I
wanted to be a somebody." Now he would
face the full wroth of the law for this
affront to the queen. Sergeant was
charged under the rarely invoked 1842
treason act, specifically under section
two that he quote willfully discharged
at or near her majesty the queen a gun
with the intent to alarm or distress her
majesty end quote.
Sergeant stood trial on the 14th of
September 1981. The judge being the Lord
Chief Justice himself, Lord Lane.
During his trial, Sergeant explained
that he had been inspired by the
assassination of John Lennon in December
1980
and the attempted assassinations of
President Ronald Reagan in March 1981,
most recently that of Pope John Paul II
in May 1981.
He said that he was impressed by how
quickly Lenon's assassin Mark Chapman
became world famous and desired the same
media exposure for himself.
When Reagan was shot, friends of his
recalled that he said, "I would like to
be the first one to take a pot shot at
the queen." A psychologist who examined
Sergeant before the trial found him to
be sane, and therefore he knew that he
was using a blank firing pistol, so he
probably did not intend to harm the
queen. Rather, it was a stunt made for
the express purpose of gaining him fame.
Be that as it may, Sergeant was found
guilty of the charges under the Treason
Act, and Lord Lane sentenced him to 5
years imprisonment. Sergeant's lawyer
appealed the length of the sentence, but
the appeal was refused. Whilst in
prison, Sergeant wrote to the queen
apologizing for shooting at her, but
received no reply.
After 3 years imprisonment, Sergeant was
released in October 1984 at the age of
20. He changed his name and re-entered
society. What he is up to today, I don't
know.
The Queen continued to ride annually at
Trooping the Color until 1986 when she
began to travel instead by open
carriage.
The Queen's last appearance at Trooping
the Color was on the 2nd of June 2022
when the first battalion Irish guards
troop their color.
Too frail to attend Horse Guard's
parade, she took the salute from the
balcony of Buckingham Palace.
Her Majesty passed away at the age of 96
at Balmoral Castle in Scotland on the
8th of September 2022 after 70 years on
the throne.
Many thanks for watching. Please
subscribe and share and also visit my
audio book channel, War Stories with
Mark Felton. You can also help to
support both of my channels at PayPal
and Patreon. Details in the description
box below.
[Music]